Now if you read this, you will get excited.
You will see that the
opposite of what the regulations say is happening to you.  There is a slight gap between what IRDA says
and what the companies are doing,
which is not good for the industry also.
Okay, hello, welcome.  As
you know I try to
share such information with you.  Let me
give you such tips with which you can use your health
insurance effectively before buying it, after buying it
and at the time of claim.
Last week, when I was doing some studies in the same series,
some
surprising things came to me.  Ah, I feel
that things are not going well with the customers
, things are not going well.  So I thought
I would talk about that with you today.
Health
insurance policies in India are regulated
under the health regulations of IRDA
and in the health regulations of IRDA,
you will see that once you buy a health insurance
policy, then
you renew it every year and at the
time of renewal, you have certain
rights.  One of the major rights among them is
that once you have taken the policy, then if there are
any
kind of health changes on that policy after purchasing the policy, then there will not be
any kind of
re-underwriting at the time of your renewal or there will be
no premium loading on it, that is, the
company cannot increase your premium on the basis of claim based claim experience.   This is what
health regulations say.  Which if
I read in literal words, for
individual products the loading on
renewal shall be in terms of increase or
decrease in premium offered for the entire
portfolio and shall not be based on any
individual policy claim experience.   This
means that the company
can increase or decrease the premium of the entire portfolio i.e. all the customers
but cannot increase it on the basis of any one customer's
personal individual experience.
Now you will say
that this is a very good right.  But here there is
some doubt on transparency or some
intention.  When you
read the policies of some big companies,
last week when I was reading ICICI Lombard
's Elevate policy, they have
written a point in the specific conditions
which is called material change.
Now if you read this, your hair will stand on end.
You will see that the opposite of what the
regulations say is happening to you.
What does it say?  The
insured person shall notify the company in
writing of any material change in the risk in relation
to the declaration made in the
proposal form and medical examination
report at each renewal and the company may
adjust the scope of coverage and
premium if necessary accordingly. This
means that the company is saying that whenever you
renew the policy,
if there is any change in your health history or health status at the time of purchase of the policy, then
you have to mandatorily inform it at the time of renewal.
They have put such a condition.
And when you tell them, the company
can change your coverage
or change your premium on that basis.  So
what the regulations say is that your
experience based will not be claim based loading.
Here the company is going one step further.  Whether the
claim has been taken or not.
But if you did
not have high blood pressure when you took the policy.  Today, if you
declare at the time of renewal, the company has
taken the right in its hands that it may
impose loading on you or may change your terms and
conditions.  So this is a big point.
This is not in one company.
I read the policy of ICICI LBRD Elevat, it is there also.
Manipal is a lifetime health policy from Cigna.  There
are similar conditions in that too.
Similarly, SBI has Arogya Supreme policy which
also has similar conditions.  And
if you look at Reliance General
Insurance's Help Gain policy, it
also has the same condition.  The same is written on
material change.  That is, IRDA
regulations say that once you have
taken a policy, if your health
condition changes or even if you make a claim, the
company cannot change your premium just because your
health condition has deteriorated or you have made a
claim.  But these terms, these
conditions, the company has put specific conditions here
where the company is binding you
that you will tell at the time of renewal
and according to what you tell, the company can
change the conditions or premium.   The
scope of cover may change.  Which is very very surprising very very
disappointing also.  Now many people
will say that sir it is written in the policy
but the company does not do it.  Does not agree.
And I have
not come across any such case till now where the
policy terms or premium have
changed due to such conditions.  But legally you have given the
company the right to do this because
you have accepted this policy.  So
what do you have to do now?  Brother, you have to do a simple thing
that
before buying the policy, read the terms and conditions of the coverage of the policy.
Read the exclusions.
Ask your agent.  And even if
you have purchased the policy, read it.
When the policy comes, read it.
You have 30 days time
which is called free look period.  If there
is any such condition and you are not comfortable with it,
then you can return the policy and
get your premium refunded.  But please be
very careful and be aware.  This is where the
important role of any good
insurance consultant comes in.  You should
talk to a good insurance consultant and ask
as many questions as you need
and then take the policy. Even after taking the policy,
you should read your policy yourself,
do your due diligence and check it so that
you do not face any problem at the time of claim.  So there
is a little gap between what IRDA says and what the companies are doing, which is
not good for the industry as it
breaks the trust.  Regulations say
no loading claim based, here these
terms say that you tell us if there has been a health change
then also we can apply loading.   You
can change the premium and
also change the scope of cover.  Be careful and
consult experts.  Read the policy yourself
and
understand it thoroughly within 30 days after purchasing the policy. If you do
not understand it, you can return it and
get a refund.  Beerful as I always say life
is beautiful you are lucky and God is guide enjoy
yourself.